---
title: Frosty Friends Falling at Foster Falls
description: "Freezing and falling on the frosty sport climbs of Foster Falls with fantastic friends from Florida"
date: 2023-12-17
tags: ["climbing", "oar"]
layout: post
draft: false
---

![The Falls of Foster Falls!](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0006.jpeg)

<https://ufadventure.com/dt3919>

Frequently, fervently, we had fostered fantasies of flocking to Foster Falls,
but foiled by fickle forecasts we flocked to more frequented frontiers closer to
Florida. Finally, fortune favored us, facilitating fulfillment at Foster Falls!

Ok, I'll stop with the alliteration :^)

This was a great trip. I climbed routes harder than those I'd been willing to
try in months prior, the company was superb, the food was fantastic (last one!),
and the weather had finally given us a chance to enjoy this unique and dramatic
landscape of the Southeast.

## Day One: To Tennessee We Go!

We left Thursday around 5pm and arrived in Tennessee at an ungodly hour. This is
how most of our trips go. This is the first OAR trip I've blogged about, but
mostly all of our trips out of the state went like this:

1. **Friday**: Meet at gear shed and leave at 5pm; arrive at ungodly hour; setup
   camp and have heavenly sleep

2. **Saturday**: Wake up and engage in outdoor recreation all day

3. **Sunday**: More outdoor recreation for as long as we can bear it; eat
   Ethiopian food in Atlanta at [Bahel](https://ufadventure.com/dd28); arrive
   back in Gainesville around midnight

I loved every second of these trips!

![Meeting at the gear shed](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0001.jpeg)

*Meeting at OAR's iconic gear shed, the start of countless trips for the last 20
years or so*

![Driving up](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0002.jpeg)

*Alexandra brought us extra company; a cute Christmas tree she made!*

## Day Two: Climb On!

![Camp setup](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0003.jpeg)

*We setup our camp and headed out to climb*

![Overlooking the falls](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0004.jpeg)

*What a view... It was super cold but all this beauty has a way of warming you
up*

![At the base of the falls](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0005.jpeg)

*The water was really going today; it varies greatly depending on the rainfall*

We started our climbing not too far from the start of the climber's trail. I
believe it was a 5.9? I ticked most of the climbs we did on this trip on
[Mountain Project](https://www.mountainproject.com/user/201650651/jack-polk) but
not sure about this one. I believe it was in the "Falls Area".

Henry started the climbing on this one. I was happy to let him, as I was still
pretty squeamish about leading, even on easy stuff I know I could flash. It felt
nice to see him make light work of it and setup a top rope for the rest of the
group.

![Henry getting ready to climb](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0007.jpeg)

![Henry crushing](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0008.jpeg)

I thought the rock was really cool looking here. It was very jagged, which made
for great holds. It wasn't slabby but rather vertical with cool "mini-roofs"
that required going out and around various formations.

![Tommy crushing too](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0009.jpeg)

![The gang](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0010.jpeg)

![Reading a good book](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0011.jpeg)

![More of the gang](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0012.jpeg)

I don't just say this to be nice: everyone did a great job on this trip.
Everyone had a great attitude, pushed themselves out of their comfort zone, and
were super supportive. Early on in the trip, Tommy especially was already trying
hard stuff and leading for the first time (outdoors but I believe anywhere as
well)! He crushed hard stuff this entire trip and had such an amazing spirit and
happiness about him.

![Tommy crushing a 5.10](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0013.jpeg)

This 5.10 I lead was very cool. It had a very clear roof section that was really
easy to get up and around. The moves weren't particularly hard but they were
committing. Even with good holds, good protection, and good conditions, I found
myself psyched out, so I took once on this route. But after that, I had a
fantastic time on the route and the fun roof section made me completely forget
about my fear.

![Cool roof climb](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0015.jpeg)

![Heel hook!](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0016.jpeg)

*Heel hook felt super good enough*

![Hildaleigh crushing](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0017.jpeg)

*Hildaleigh also stands out for being a fellow new climber that is improving
very quickly*

![Everyone around the route](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0018.jpeg)

*Would you like a Scandinavian Swimmer? What's that? Oh, only the best candy in
the universe*

![Resting on the rope](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0019.jpeg)

*This climb had an odd rope configuration that was making people fall onto the
rope when they were resting*

![Doh!](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0020.jpeg)

*I was also chilling on it!*

![Gang has beanies](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0021.jpeg)

*The gang was rocking the coolest (or should I say warmest?) beanies this trip.
Tommy's was handmade by Czar Alexandra!*

![Beautiful sunset poking through the trees](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0022.jpeg)

*The sunset brought back with it the grueling cold*

![Enjoying our last moments of the day at the crag](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0025.jpeg)

*To pass, you must answer three questions... First! What is your name?*

![Cleaning in the dark](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0026.jpeg)

*I'm glad I brought my headlamp with me! Cleaning this route in the dark was really fun*

![Campfire treats](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0027.jpeg)

*Hildaleigh's pretzel twists were a hit, especially heated up over the fire!*

![Soup time](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0028.jpeg)

*Our gracious guests brought with them glistening ve**gg**ies and made a
delicious soup for all of us. The added PBR was... interesting : )*

![Pocket bellow time](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0029.jpeg)

*David Dilmore would be so proud... or angry. I don't know how to fire, but me like heat : )*

## Day Three: Warm Up Complete; Time To Send

The temperatures for this trip were not the most forgiving. The nights swung
down to the low 20s and the days hovered around the low to mid 40s. Day
temperatures were actually very nice once you were warmed up from climbing. But
the nighttime necessitated a raging fire for everyone to be happy. The mornings
were the coldest and the roughest. Getting out of my sleeping bag was painful
but the pull of hot cocoa, food, and rocks was potent.

![A peaceful sunrise](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0030.jpeg)

![Bruh](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0031.jpeg)

*25 and the friggin bananas are frozen solid!*

![Huddled around a humble fire](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0032.jpeg)

![But we're having fun!](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0033.jpeg)

![Huddled in the bathroom](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0034.jpeg)

*The bathroom's had the luxury of electric heating; we all retreated to the
womans bathroom after breakfast to warm up a bit*

![The gang walking](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0045.jpeg)

*That's my gang, ya hurd me*

![Joe](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0046.jpeg)

*Joe*

![Icicles](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0036.jpeg)

![These are clean right?](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0064.jpeg)

*Icicles; very cool!*

![Down the stairs](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0037.jpeg)

*The steep stairs lead to a cool rickety bridge that passes by the falls*

![The bridge](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0048.jpeg)

![Finally warming up on some cold rocks](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0038.jpeg)

*Finally warming up on some cold rocks*

![Hildaleigh acting all fancy](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0052.jpeg)

*I can only dream of replicating the retro aesthetic of [old OAR trip
pictures](http://www.jeffdepree.com/logs/pictures/AAlaska0260.jpg)*

![Goofy picture of me](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0053.jpeg)

*Uh... that's not retro*

![Alexandra climbing](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0055.jpeg)

*She runs, climbs, bikes, knits... what can't she do?! (drugs I suppose)*

![Alexandra's first lead climb](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0065.jpeg)

*And she lead climbs!*

![The bunker](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0056.jpeg)

*The bunker is arguably one of the coolest looking climbing areas at the falls.
When we were leaving, we ran into some people that were visiting from Louisiana
and one of them said they were going to try some of the stuff on there. Oh I
would've loved to see it!*

![Cool shot of the last climbing area of the day](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0066.jpeg)

![Tommy sending](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0040.jpeg)

*Tommy almost onsighted a very tricky 5.10d. Someone on Mountain Project
complained of this route breaking their tibia. SMH technique...*

![Brought to you by Cliff](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0044.jpeg)

*This trip was brought to you by Cliff. Please sponsor me...*

![Tommy and Jack](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0067.jpeg)

![Coolest shot perhaps](https://public.ranvier.net/images/frosty-friends-falling-at-foster-falls/0068.jpeg)

I really hope to come back here some day soon. It is such a unique place and its
not only restricted to climbing. We did a backpacking trip here almost two years
ago and it was one of my favorites. I'd love to drag my brother out here and
make him camp and climb for a few days with me.
